No, you can sit over here.
Okay, the tape is on.
We have a visitor tonight, my wife, who read the book and loved it, so she wanted to sit
in and listen.
Oh, fine.
See what an author sounds like.
Okay, as I said, the tape is on.
Why an novel featuring both vampires and the Mississippi Riverboat era?
Well, I could say why not, but that would be evading the issue.
Essentially the vampires came first in my own personal...the vampires came first as I was
putting the book together.
I had read a fair amount about vampires.
I had read other people's vampire novels, for example, Dracula, as one of the other
books done recently.
I had wanted to do my own version of that legend for some time, because I had a few
ideas about it.
But I didn't want it to be just another Dracula book, just another rehash of the same old
legends, because we've seen vampire books after vampire books that are essentially just
the same things spun over and over again, and I think that's tiresome.
At the same time I was going through all these thoughts about vampires was the period that
I was living in Dubuque, Iowa.
I taught college there for three years, and Dubuque, of course, is an old river town.
It was once a big steamboat manufacturing center, and it's still very much imbued with
the old history of the great era of steam on the Mississippi.
So it was during that period while I was in Dubuque that I got interested in the...that
period of history.
I got interested in the steamboat.
I read a fair amount about them.
And once I did, the two things just seemed to come together in my mind.
There's a certain romanticism, I think, a dark romanticism that clings to both the old steamboats
and vampires.
They're both very attractive in a certain sense, the elegant vampire and the stately,
intricate, gorgeous steamboat, but they also have dark sides too, of course.
It's obvious in the case of the vampire, in the case of the steamboat, they were very
dangerous most of the travel.
They were always blowing up and oiler explosions, fires, having a bomb torn out by the river.
It was a tumultuous time, and the river towns were rough, dangerous places.
You had towns like Natchez on the hill, for example, which Natchez under the hill, the
kind of double city of Natchez that existed at that time and is referred to in the book.
And it seems to me that's a literal metaphor for the vampirism, the two natures, good and
bad, together in one entity.
Why do you think vampires are so attractive to people through the years they've been popular
and it seems like now they're really popular?
What, why is that?
That's an interesting question.
Vampires are an almost universal legend, which is one thing that turned out when I was researching
Fever Dream.
The vampires we're familiar with, of course, Dracula and his kin, so to speak, and all the
books that are derived from that tradition are essentially retreads of Eastern European,
Romanian, Hungarian, largely vampire legends.
But if you look around the world, you'll find vampire legends everywhere.
In China, in Africa, in the South Seas, there are variants of the vampire legend.
The details differ, but the basic vision of a nocturnal predator that preys on human beings
is present in all of these.
And so that would lead you to wonder why do they have this universal appeal.
The easy answer is to why they're appealing in our culture today in modern American mass
society, I think, is the sexual nature of the vampire, the sexual symbolism embodied in
Dracula and in the way it's been treated by Hollywood.
The symbolism of vampire as a seductor is, um,
appeals to something within us and gives legend a lot more resonances than, say, the
werewolf legend or zombies or some of the other things that have never really achieved
the popularity of the vampire legend.
But then you could say, well, that's true for us, but it doesn't explain why the legend
is so universal around the world.
And indeed, it doesn't, but I don't have an answer for that.
In the terms of fever dream, I looked at that universality and I made it one of the bases
when I started writing the novel.
I said, what if the reason that these legends are universal is because they're all remembering
the same thing.
They're all remembering some kind of racial memory of a real man-like, predatory animal,
blood drinker that is somehow the basis for all the vampire legends.
And that was the premise that I, of course, used in the fever dream.
You incorporated some of the traditional vampire elements such as they couldn't come out in the
middle of the day, but yes, some of the others, they couldn't see their, well, you couldn't
see their images in a mirror, the fear of silver, I assume garlic was out, whatever.
Was this kind of a conscious sifting through the vampire traditions and settling on ones
that seemed reasonable and others that just seemed like they would just be fantasy or
hearsay about vampires?
Yeah, more or less.
I wanted to have rationalized vampires.
I wanted to have vampires that I thought could actually exist,
that were not based on, you know, vague supernatural legends and down over the years.
So I had to look at each of the particular beliefs associated with vampires and see,
is there any way that I could justify this in a rational manner?
Now, obviously something about vampires not coming out during day, which the vampires in my book
Fever Dream do have that characteristic.
Well, that's very easily explainable.
It's just they're nocturnal creatures.
Their skin is extremely sensitive to ultraviolet, so they burn very badly if they're exposed to
daylight, so they avoid it.
You can justify that easily.
But you look at something they're not reflected in mirrors.
I mean, there's no way to justify not being reflected in mirrors scientifically.
You have to rewrite essentially all the laws governing light and reflection and refraction
and so on.
That's strictly a supernatural motif, so I had to get rid of that.
Obviously, considering that the book is about vampires on Mississippi Ribs Steamboats,
I had to get rid of the one that said they can't cross running water as well,
and they sail up and down the steamboat all through the book.
Your concept of the red thirst, which came up on the vampires periodically, was something I had
not run into before in Vampire Legends.
That, again, I would assume was part of the rationalizing their existence in this world,
as opposed to just the fantasy vampires.
More or less, yeah.
And it was also part of what I was trying to do with Fever Dream thematically.
I suppose as much as anything else.
I mean, the book is about vampires on Mississippi Ribs Steamboats, but in a deeper sense,
it's about moral choices.
And one of the things that Joshua York, the vampire, says to Abner,
Abner Marsh, the protagonist, and that Abner later says back to him is,
you make your choices.
We all make our choices.
If you take the traditional vampire thing, the traditional vampire believes the traditional
vision of the vampire.
You don't have choice.
The vampire is an avatar of undying, ancient, and absolutely black evil.
Well, okay, fine.
That makes for good entertainment, but as it interacts with the real world,
kind of a hollow construct.
The real world is made up of graves.
I think real people are made up of graves.
We don't have absolute goods.
And we don't have absolute evils.
It's a good and evil that we have resides in each of us, and it is a matter of moral choice.
So that's why the book is constructed around four characters, two human beings and two vampires.
But issues of good and evil are not easily broken down.
There are good human beings and good vampires in the terms of the book.
And there is a bad vampire and evil vampire, but also an evil human being.
So the four characters, four major characters, Abner, Joshua, Damon, Julian, and Sourbilly,
Tipton all kind of reflect and interact with each other in what I hope are interesting ways.
When did Julian make his choice?
Just eons ago, or did he ever really think about making a choice as far as this moral choice?
Well, he did make a choice eons ago, but he also makes the choice in terms of the book at the banquet
when he essentially rejects what Joshua has to offer.
And states his opposition to Joshua with saying, you know, we are born.
This is what we are born to be.
Masters over humanity, people who take the lives of those inferior to us.
And this is our nature.
So he is making a choice there.
He's rejecting Joshua's potion.
He's rejecting the freedom from the red thirst Joshua offers.
And he's accepting what he thinks is of his superior nature.
Of course, there's also certain, you know, resonances there with the whole slavery thing,
which I tried to put through all the way through the book.
It takes place in the antebellum South, late antebellum South.
And slavery, of course, is very hot then.
And the whole master slave thing that existed between blacks and whites in the South then
has a kind of a fancy reflection in relations between vampires and human beings.
Captain Marsh was a character that I really liked.
And I think he's one of the strongest characters you've come up with in your writing.
Did he occur to you early or did he occur to you as you started doing the research
and we're looking for a strong protagonist?
Well, like any character, I think in a work of fiction like a novel,
Abner Marsh just grew.
I mean, I had the basic outlines of the character when I started the book.
But the more you write about it, the more you learn and get to know the character.
And you go back later and you do subsequent drafts,
changing some of the stuff that goes earlier on.
By the time I finished Fever Dream, I was thoroughly enraptured with Abner,
who was a character that I liked very much also.
And I'm glad he came across as well.
There are certain real riverboat captains who were loose models for Abner Marsh.
But he's not modeled strictly on any one person.
I took a couple characteristics from one famous steamboat captain and a couple from another.
And just a couple from other people that I knew and sort of mixed them together
and came up with Abner.
One thing you mentioned to Captain Marsh and then the slavery,
I thought one thing that made it effective was Captain Marsh's essential neutrality
towards slavery and then things kind of slowly dawned on him.
He wasn't up on a soapbox, either pro or against.
And so it didn't come across as preachy.
And that was appreciated by the reader, definitely.
Oh, thank you.
Well, of course, that was the intention that Marsh's exposure to Joshua
and exposure to the whole night folks, as he calls them, or vampires,
changes him.
It makes him a much different man at the end than at the beginning.
Abner Marsh is never an evil man.
I think by nature he is a good man.
But he is a man at the beginning of a book who's essentially just living his own life.
And they degrade moral issues of his time like slavery are things he kind of hashes out over the dinner table,
but never has any great personal involvement in.
But as a result of the whole experience with the steamer, Fever Dream, and the things that
happen to him, I think Marsh changes and becomes, in essence, man is much more aware of,
necessitates make moral choices.
Fever Dream is a storehouse of historical fact and fact and descriptions and that sort of
thing.
I assume you spent a lot of time researching this before you actually sat down to write it.
I did about, it took me two years to do Fever Dream altogether.
The first year of that was largely research.
I did not research at, you know, eight hours every day, but I was still teaching at the
Duke during the period where I actually began to research.
But I did a fair amount of it.
As I said, it did take me a year.
I read considerably in the field.
I traveled on as many of the existing steamboats as I could, those that still fly the Mississippi
River system.
And I went to various cities where scenes from the book take place, St. Louis, New Orleans,
Louisville, so forth.
There's a steamboat museum there, walked the streets to get a little feel of, especially
in the older sections of town, like the French Quarter in New Orleans.
A lot of research did go into it, yes.
I think that's a necessity if you're going to do justice to any sort of historical fiction.
Fever Dream, of course, is historical horror, but I still thank you to all your readers that
get some accuracy in so far as you're capable of it.
Was there ever a riverboat as grand as the Fever Dream?
Oh, yes.
The dimensions of the Fever Dream and the capacity of her engines and so forth are modeled very
closely on the eclipse.
In terms of the book, the eclipse is the queen of the river, the fastest, largest,
and most luxurious boat, and it's the one Abner Marsh aspires to displace as
fastest steamer on the river, and that's why he built the Fever Dream.
The eclipse was a real historical boat of its era, the 1850s, and was considered
the fastest boat of that era.
It did indeed win a very famous steamboat race against the Shotwell.
And some people, including Mark Twain, put forward evidence that the Fever Dream was, in fact,
the fastest steamer ever on the river, and there were later steamers in the 1870s and the 1880s
that, while they were not perhaps as fast as the Fever Dream in the book or the Eclipse in real life,
were even more luxurious, like the J.M. White, very fast and incredibly luxurious steamer of the
1870s, 1880s.
I was surprised at the lack of longevity of the steamboats.
They just didn't last very long, did they?
No, they did.
That was one of the interesting things that turned up when I was researching it, that kind of startled
me, too. I mean, they're such formidable-looking structures.
You'd think they'd be around for ages, but in fact, they had a shorter lifespan than the modern card.
Hold on a second. Someone's on my door. Can you turn off the recorder, Sek?
No problem.
Hello, still?
Yes, sir. Here I am now. Okay, the tape is back on.
Fever Dream, as I recall, is what they used to call a stretch of the river.
Was that a town? For some reason, it escaped me. I didn't write this down. What Fever Dream was
before the book, where he got the name?
Oh, well, I guess I'll ask his dad.
Well, Christy, title of the book is taken from the name of the steamboat in the book. The Fever
Dream is named Steamboat. And the reason after Marsh names the Steamboat Fever Dream is because
it is the boat he has always dreamed of having, the grand, luxurious, fast steamer.
And because he is the president, his company is called Fever River Package Company,
with that odd spelling the RE inverted. He was born in Galena, Illinois.
And the river Galena is located on a small tributary that comes off the Mississippi,
which originally was named the Fever River, F-E-V-R-E River, in the early 1800s.
And Marsh, of course, was born during that period and grew up calling it, in point of fact,
and this is all historically true, the name of that river was changed to Galena River fairly
early on because the town got respectable and they didn't want people thinking they were all sick
there. So they thought it would be better to call it the Galena River. But Galena was a very important
steamboat town and the Fever in its early days, today it's nothing but a creek, it's completely
silted up and I've visited it and you couldn't get a robot to hop it, let alone a major steamer.
But in the early 1800s, Galena was a major steamboat port and the Fever or the Galena
River as it later became was a very bustling little tributary indeed. And a lot of traffic
went up and down it. There was no real Fever River Package Company.
I heard and love it, George Proctor talking to you about the cover of the book. He said it
wouldn't help sell the book. I guess I'll ask, first of all, does an author have any say so
in a cover? Second of all, does it really matter? And thirdly, what did you think of the cover of
Fever Dream? First of all, does the author have any say so? The author has minimal say so.
They will ask the author for advice in some cases and I'd say maybe once out of four times they'll
ask the author. But that doesn't mean they pay any attention to anything the author might say
after they ask him. In the case of Fever Dream, I think it's the best cover I've ever gotten and
I think George is absolutely dead wrong in that. It's a wonderful cover. I have the original
art which I've purchased now hanging on my wall. It is an inaccurate cover in one respect. The
steamboat that is portrayed on the cover is a stern wheeler when the Fever Dream in the book is a
side wheeler which was much more common, the side wheelers are the class boats of the river.
But it's still a marvelously executed cover, I think, and a lovely subtle,
the kind of ghostboat look and the reflection of the vampire in the water. And as for not selling
the book, well, the book is already in its second printing and seems to be doing very well. It's
gotten the best reviews I've ever gotten in my career. So I'm very happy with the way it's selling
so far. Great. Are you a fan of Lord Byron by any chance? Yeah. Byron and Shelley, the Romantics.
Okay. You mentioned that you had started working on this book when you were in Dubuque. How did it
fit in with the writing of the other books that have come out? Did you weave its writing in and
out with them? Do you tend to write books one at a time? No, I write books one at a time. But the
publishing industry publishes them slowly, which is something that I guess many readers don't realize.
I was in Dubuque from 1976 through 1979.
I began work on Fever Dream, began researching it late 1978. So for the last month or so of 1978,
and for most 1979, I devoted to research on Fever Dream while I was teaching. I actually sat down
and began writing Fever Dream right at the end of 1979, around December or so. And 1980, I moved
to Santa Fe. Actually, it was very, it was like Christmas, 1979. I moved to New Mexico. And my
first year here was essentially just devoted to work on Fever Dream. I finished it late in 1980.
That was when it was sold. And it has been two years into making.
During which period I have gone on and written other books?
The publisher was at Poseidon? Poseidon Press.
How are they related to the other presses? Well, Poseidon Press is essentially a new imprint of
Pocket Books, Simon & Schuster. Although it bears Poseidon Press imprint, it is edited by
Pocket Books editors and distributed through Simon & Schuster sales reps.
Oh, interrelationships of imprints and publishers is perhaps too complicated and not sufficiently
interesting to go into. So the major thing for people seeking to book to know is that Fever Dream
is a Poseidon Press hardcover and distributed through Simon & Schuster can be obtained through them.
Any sequels or prequels for the future?
I've had several people suggest sequels to me. I have no immediate plans for doing any. No,
I think the story finishes when it finishes. But I wouldn't rule them out completely. Obviously,
the type of vampires exist in the book I could do more with if I chose to.
I would think prequels might almost be in order more than sequels in that you could go even earlier.
However, I guess Marsh is out. He would be an interesting case. Maybe you could write the 13
years what he did then if you ever wanted to go back to him. Okay, one final question then,
I guess just more for the in general. This is a more or less in the horror genre if we have to
assign genres to things. Why is that genre thriving? I guess more than thriving now,
but that seems to be the biggest genre, even bigger than romances. Again,
why do people like to get scared at this particular point in history?
That's an interesting question. I'm not sure I have a good answer for it. I could take a stab at it.
I think part of it is simply a literary phenomenon. Stephen King, an enormously talented writer who
has revolutionized and modernized horror and made an extremely viable form once again after
decades in the doldrums. A lot of it is people's response to King has been so enormous that
a lot of imitators have come in. I hope that with FigurDream I've
done a little more than imitation. I tried to bring something new and original to it.
In a deeper psychological sense, beyond simply the literary and commercial success story of King,
I think people may be going to horror because in horror novels we're scared,
but we can control the scares. We can read the book and scare ourselves,
but then we put down the book and we know that what we're afraid of, vampires, werewolves,
haunted hotels, whatever, is not real. People don't mind dealing with that and getting a little
catharsis out of that, but they don't want to deal with the real terrifying things of violence
in the streets and crime and crazed psychos out there and the threat of nuclear holocaust and
all of the other more real fears that also hang over it. I think that may be part of it.
Would you object if somebody came along and said they wanted to make a movie out of FigurDream?
It seems like a good candidate for a movie. Well, I would love to see a movie.
We've had a fair amount of interest from Hollywood, but nothing definite.
Oh, good. I envisioned Sour Billy as just war and oats, just straight war and oats,
especially at the first. Towards the end it was more difficult to imagine it,
but I could just see the whole movie. I don't know who would be Captain Marsh, though.
That would be a hard one to cast. To get somebody to gain a lot of weight.
Well, I could see Ed Asner in it. Yeah, that's true. Yeah, he would be good.
Okay, I have to go back and reread it with that in mind. Do you have any questions, Susan?
Okay, she doesn't want to ask any. George, thanks very much. It was a pleasure.
Thank you. And plus I enjoyed the book really. It was quite good.
Well, I'm glad to hear that, of course. And thanks for doing the interview.
You'll be able to send me a tape like you did on the last one?
Sure. You want a tape of the Raw interview as well?
I'm not the tape of the finished product.
Yeah, we'll send you a tape of the finished product. I'll probably write it up pretty quick,
and we'll get a few shows out of it, and we'll send it on to you. Yeah.
When you send that to me, could you also like to go to the list of the stations we'll be
broadcast, because I know the public relations people at Simon Schuster would like to know that.
Sure. Be glad to. Okay. No problem. George, thanks again.
Keep on writing. Look forward to seeing what's coming out next.
Sounds good. I'll see you at Texas Con.
Great. Bye-bye now.